The Photo Search This particular episode in our life illustrates
the strange forces of coincidence that seems to centre on the island of Crete. One winter
evening in Greek school at home in Sussex, Christina, one of our class members, handed
us a large A3 black and white photo. It showed a typical small Cretan fishing boat complete
moored close to the shore, with a corner of a stone building in the background. My husband
took this when we were staying in Crete in the 1970s. He thinks it's your village. We
thanked her for the photo and took it home. Later in the year, when sorting stuff out
in the house, the photo resurfaced and we thought we should bring it with us to the
island to see if we could identify the location or the fisherman, although this seemed quite
unlikely after all this time. A few days into our next stay, we remembered to take the
photograph into town with us and tried to tie down the location. We didn't know whether
the places that were used for moorings had changed over time, but there were a couple
of likely places where stone buildings were near to the shore. A brief discussion in the
first cafe suggested the road towards the causeway by the old carob factory. We knew
this location as it had recently been opened as a lovely restaurant and had quickly become
one of our favourites to eat at. When we arrived there, Dimitri, one of the co-owners, became
very excited and took a photo over to the edge of the building that butted onto his
restaurant and pointed out to us that the wall shown in it was the same as in the photo.
He asked if he could borrow it and copy or scan it to display on the wall of the restaurant.
We readily agreed and said we would collect the original the following week, but asked
him if he knew or could find out who the person was in the photo. A few days later Dimitri
called to us as we were walking past and returned the photo, but admitted he had not been able
to find out the identity of the mystery fisherman, perhaps he was no longer in town or even no
longer alive. It was hard to exactly put an age on the fisherman, he appeared to have
a good head of black curls and was probably between mid-20s and mid-30s, so if the photo
was taken in 1975 we were looking for a 60-70 year old. We walked back to the town square
and settled down to an iced coffee in our favourite bar. The owner was a local lad,
like so many in the town, but probably far too young to recognise the mystery fisherman,
but when we told him the story he quickly entered into the spirit of the quest. I don't
readily recognise him, but my father might, we'll ask him shortly when he calls by.
When his father arrived there was a close scrutiny of the photo, with the necessary
swapping of reading glasses from distance ones. It could be George, he normally walks
this way most mornings. In a moment of pure coincidence George was spotted on the other
side of the road carrying his shopping and walking next to the harbour. Nictalius ran
towards him carrying the photo, followed at a more sedate pace by his dad. As he approached
the suspect he slowed and after a short conversation over the photo they returned to the bar. No,
it's not him, but there is Manolis who is the right age and has curly hair, maybe we
should ask him the Caffeineon. This was a good suggestion, but a little intimidating
as the most popular Caffeineon in town was certainly full of potential suspects on a
daily basis. Although we used the Caffeineons in the village, the two in town had always
looked too Cretan and full of local men, smoking, playing backgammon and drinking their thick
black Greek coffees and rackies. Also conversation was conducted at high speed and high volume
with gesticulation bordering on violence. It was still rare to see obvious non-Greeks
I'm sure we would have been made welcome. The idea of trying to identify a stranger
from 30 plus years ago with the help of 20 plus Cretan pensioners fuelled on nicotine,
strong alcohol and caffeine was not an immediately attractive prospect. Wisdom suggested we would
defer the task for another day. A few days later our curiosity again got the better of
us and we tried another approach. The shop next to the most popular Caffeineon is owned
and run by a couple that we have chatted with over the years that we have visited their
town. They are English as far superior to our Greek and we wondered if George would
be a good interpreter to attempt the extension of search of the Caffeineon. After exchanging
the use of pleasantries and inquiring about families, business and progress on our house,
I produced the photo. After a short scrutiny there was a feeling that he was familiar.
Eleni suggested that her mother may have a better idea so she was summoned from her chair
outside for her opinion. This suggestion provided something of a breakthrough. Eleni's mum
took one look at the photo, laughed and said, Michalis Mathiakis and something else which
George translated for us. She says it's not a recent photo. So he was still alive,
still in town? Where? It was suggested that he lived somewhere off the main road south
of the town, opposite the Causeway Road and in a house somewhere behind the restaurant
with a pizza oven. Pretty specific directions then. We would follow them up before any other
theories on identity were offered. That afternoon we drove to the south end of town, parked
by the nearest restaurant opposite the Causeway junction and went inside looking for a pizza
oven. Once we established that one of the three staff appeared to be decorating the restaurant,
that we were not actually in the market for a mid-afternoon pizza, in fact looking for someone,
the now familiar photo scrutiny ritual began. After a few moments the trio broke into laughter,
eventually explaining that yes it was Michalis, he lived nearby, the last house up the hill at
the side of the restaurant. No need to drive, it's nearby. Again the comment was added,
it's not a recent picture, followed by more laughter. We walked up the hill and around
two corners and came to a large two-storey traditional style house with a wraparound balcony
and blue shutters behind a metal gate and high railings. This must be it, so we opened the gate
and walked through a beautiful garden full of vegetables, flowers and fruit trees.
We rang the doorbell and waited but there was no answer. Some brick steps led around the side and
upstairs to another door with a bell but again there was no response. Disappointed we left,
was it the right house? As we came out a woman walked by who we recognised as someone who led
her sheep past Maria's apartment when we used to stay there. They were taken to graze up on the
hillside and brought back in the evening. We asked if this was the house of Michalis Mathiakis,
yes of course, we planned to return and try again. It took two more visits before the evening that
the door was answered by a man with a smiling but puzzled face and receding curly grey hair.
The brief conversation was curtailed by Michalis laughing out loud at the image of a very much
younger self in the photo. His wife was called and introductions were made with some confusion
caused by our very haunting Greek and their virtually non-existent English. Nevertheless,
we were ushered within. Please sit down, what would you like to drink? We settled on orange juice,
partly because we knew the word for it in Greek but also because clear heads would be needed for
the conversation. The house was large and cool with a polished marble floor and comfortable
furnishings in a typical Greek style. We explained that a friend in England had given us the picture
and we believe it was taken over 30 years ago in Elunda. He pointed out the window to the part of
the coast where the photo was taken. It was the building next to the old carer factory and we
think he said that he still had the boat. The conversation was interrupted by Mrs Mathiakis
who was stocking up the coffee table with methesdas in between laughing again at the photo.
These included chopped cucumbers, olives, daikos with tomatoes and peppers and it wasn't long
before the inevitable carafe of Raki and a tray of small shot glasses appeared,
so much for keeping a clear head. The conversation slowly arrived at where we lived and after a
diversion to England we explained about the small holiday home in the village above the town.
I have a house there as well, explained a surprised Michaelius. Where is yours?
This part always proved difficult as we had to give directions to a house without a number
or a name in a street with no name. We gave our normal description of the turning between the two
cavernions and down. More surprise. Mine is also there, much laughter. We appear to be neighbours.
Conversations continued in a combination of our halting Greek and hand signals supplemented by
photos on my iPod. All the time Michaelius and his wife, both of whom had beautifully open faces and
ready smiles, asked the usual questions that are quickly asked in creep to the surprise of more
reserved northern Europeans. How old are you? Do you have children? How old are they? What do you do?
This revealed that Michaelius was 65 and he reckoned he was 30 when the photo was taken.
Eventually our Greek vocabulary exhausted and our stomachs full we attempted to leave.
You must come up and see our house in the village. We believed his reply was positive but were
surprised to hear that they were visiting in one hour's time. We must leave and prepare some food
to welcome them and tidy up. This was easier said than done. Eleni disappeared into the kitchen and
quickly re-emerged carrying two bags. One was full of fresh lemons from the garden and the other
full of large brown eggs. As we left the house we made the mistake of admiring the flowers in the
garden and our leaving was interrupted by the cutting of a huge bunch of flowers to take.
They were pink and white amaryllis, the sort that had grown at home one at a time indoors in a pot
at Christmas. Here they filled a flower border. As we left through the gate laden with gifts and
said our goodbyes a young man got out of his car and walked towards the gates. Michaelius called
him over and introduced him as their nephew who turned out to be a civil engineer working at one
of the large new hotel developments just up the coast. To our relief he spoke perfect English
and understood about the photo and his uncle coming to see us. He also corrected our understanding of
the return visit. It would be tomorrow at nine o'clock not tonight. So much for our Greek what
else had we got wrong? The next morning we were up early and tidied the little house after our
breakfast on the roof terrace. The flowers were in our largest jug. We'd yet to acquire a frown of
ours and we were ready to receive a visit from our new friends. They were on time and also not
empty handed carrying a large bottle of olive oil, their own pressing so we believed. There was more
laughter and pointing by Michaelius to the other side of the street across the two metre wide
alleyway. Eventually the penny dropped. The house opposite was his. While the building work went on
the architect had arranged the use of a store room for building materials in the house opposite,
a sort of basement room. It wasn't clear to us where the front door of the house was and whether
it was part of the occupied house that backed onto it. We knew that house lived in by yet another
Maria. Some time ago we'd asked the architect whether it was possible for us to continue to use
this room which seemed separate from any other house. It would be useful for storage which given
the size of our house would be a great help. It appeared that through a distant coincidence we'd
blundered upon the owner ourselves and he was our new friend. Coffee and orange juice was offered
round with biscuits and we showed our new friends around the house. The bathroom tiling and the glass
floor caused the usual surprise but all in all the house was judged as au rea, as beautiful.
The view from the roof terrace with the panoramic distant views was enthused over and we tried to
explain that this has provided the design stimulus for the house with the need for access coupled
with the requirement to get light down into the house. Having shown them around our house it was
indicated that we should look around the house opposite so finishing our drinks we followed
Michalis around the corner where he climbed a small set of stone steps and produced a key unlocking
the door into the upstairs of the house opposite. The house was still furnished though the cobwebs
suggested that any occupation was not recent. It was a series of upstairs rooms leading one from the
other, four in all with the window that was blocked in the third one that would face our house.
The last one, the kitchen, had a window towards the sea and a door onto a small balcony. Furniture
was the traditional creedner style including a tablecloth still on the table. The second room
had a round brick wall in it that was apparently a well. It was an education and strange to think
that our own house was the other side of the wall across the narrow street. Our grief recovery
didn't allow extensive discussion of interior design details so after hopefully showing the
right amount of polite enthusiasm we all came back out into the street but the house view was not yet
over. Eleni led us back up the street towards the church and after exchanging greetings with
Zambia outside her caffinier and I think a promise to return she directed us up a set of stone stairs
and unlocked the first story door. We believe she said this has been a house that was used to belong
to her aunt but wrestling with verb tenses was proving one of the greater grammatical challenges
of the Greek language. She opened up and we went in. It was a large room and once she opened the
shutters we could see a table and chairs, a 50s style kitchen unit, several large trunks and a full
size weaving loom. The electricity was still connected and she said it was for sale but before
we got into negotiations or worse any commitment to buy we quickly explained that our one Greek
house was plenty for us. There have been moments in the previous years when that seems a surplus
to be honest. Stephanie was particularly taken by the contents of the trunks that had been opened to
show rolls of fabric and pieces of embroidery. This was the second house in the village that had been
found to have a loom in it. Perhaps this was typical or were we in some textile centre of the
island. We were also shown up downstairs and a throwaway remark was made that seemed to suggest
the ownership of several other village houses. We suggested beating a retreat back to the safety
of the cavernion but concluded that the sales pattern was very low key and almost incidental.
We were also selfishly thinking of a way to bring up the subject of the storeroom opposite
but felt it wasn't the right time and concluded it should be left until a later visit as currently
we only had the pithery, one old wooden box and a few old wooden shutters that needed storing
and thought we would probably leave them out in the alleyway until our next visit.
A few days into the next visit we were walking out from the house to the hire car to drive out for
the day when we were called with the cheery calimera and it was Michaelis and Eleni getting
out of their car near the church. We explained in our best Greek that we were back again for a few
weeks and agreed that we would meet them again. Come to my house again when you're next in town.
We agreed that we would with some slight trepidation at the thought of trying to
discuss rent in the storeroom and wondering if our phrasebook or dictionary covered the
correct terms for storage and old junk and other useful terms. Later that same week,
after a few hours resting with the Greek dictionary and our phrasebook, Stephanie announced that she
prepared a letter in Greek to explain our request to rent this small room having discovered the
Greek word for a storeroom, an apotheke. Fortified with this new information and bearing gifts of
wine and biscuits, we paid an early evening call on Michaelis and Eleni. The welcome was warm and
chairs and tables were pulled out onto their large balcony, whereas the sunset we engaged in
mutual misunderstandings in Greek and broken English. Less naive friends had already instructed
us in the art of Greek negotiating and we'd been given clear advice on not settling on the
first price offered and to be tenacious including the need for essential hand and head gestures.
Of course this became less clear once the wine had been opened and poured along with the inevitable
raki in the veritable freest of Ms. Eddard's. Michaelis was invited to read the letter which
he did accompanied by some smiles and chuckles. We awaited the response while we tried to summon
up the Greek negotiating secrets that had been supplied to us earlier. They proved completely
unnecessary. If we understood Michaelis correctly he was saying we must just use the space
for free. We were friends and no rent was expected. This was very generous and completely
undermined our negotiating strategy. Our only concern was whether we'd completely misinterpreted
the response but concluded this would have to be cleared up another time as the wine and the raki
were already conspiring to make clearing anything up a bit tricky. After several hours our Greek
and drinking capacities were exhausted and we made our goodbyes and headed home but not before
a date was made for morning coffee in the village Cafferney on the following Sunday morning. Perhaps
this would be an opportunity to confirm our storage arrangements. Who knows? We walked off
towards our house not entirely clear whether we were Greek shed owners or not. Things were
never straightforward or predictable here. Maybe that's what we liked. We decided to avoid moving
any items into the neighbouring stone shed until the arrangements were possibly confirmed
and hoped to do that on Sunday over coffee. When Sunday came we made our way up into the centre
of the village which is only two minutes from our house. There seemed to be a hubbub of conversation
coming from inside Zambia's Cafferney so we went inside. The single room was packed and as our eyes
adjusted to the more subdued light compared with the bright light outside we were hailed across the
room. Jeff, Stephanie, Parmé. It was Michaelis and as we squeezed across the room towards him
others greeted us. Calamara, Calamara. It seemed that knowing Michaelis was an instant popularity
ticket. Zambia came over in a newly laundered pinafore and took our orders, a coffee and a juice.
Cheeks were kissed, hands shaken and shoulders patted. Biscuits and cakes were offered by Michaelis
as we squeezed onto the table next to him. Introductions were made but we arrived in the
middle of a number of quick fire Greek conversations and they were far too rapid and complex for us to
follow so we just sat and enjoyed the hospitality, drank our drinks, ate our biscuits and smiled
probably idiotically at anyone who looked at us. Occasionally we heard Michaelis mentioning Greek,
Maria's house and the word for English and new friends but mostly the talk was more sombre
and as people slowly left they came and shook Michaelis's hand. Shortly afterwards Michaelis
rose and pulled some notes out of his pocket and handed them to Zambia. Then he said goodbye to us.
The words apothecy and okay were used again but we'd still failed to confirm the arrangements
completely to our satisfaction. Another time perhaps and later we understood a little more
as the same afternoon or one of the obituary notices posted at points around the town we
noticed the name of Matthiakis. Did this mean that Michaelis was marking the funeral or anniversary
of a relative when entertaining people to food and drink at the Caffe Neon? We felt guilty that we'd
not understood the situation so that we could at least pass on our condolences. In the village a
day or two later we thought of a new tactic. One of the neighbours, a Belgian lady, was something of
a linguist speaking enough Greek to work in one of the hotels. Over a conversation in the Caffe
Neon we explained our dilemma and how we wanted to be certain that the arrangements were all right
before we started moving stuff into the room. It transpired that she already knew Michaelis from
the church and the Caffe Neon and it was agreed she would ring him up on our behalf. That same
evening we were walking down to town through the olive groves and stopped to admire an old net at
the side of the path all bundled up but complete with the little cork floats that we'd started
collecting when we found them washed up on the beach. I was just lamenting the fact that my
pocket knife was not with me when we were hailed in Greek by a woman's voice. A woman wearing an
apron emerged from a gateway in the stone wall bordering the olive trees. To our surprise it was
Eleni, Michaelis's wife. Our pleasure at seeing her again was tempered by the memory that she spoke
no English at all and that our attempts at limited Greek conversation convinced her on
past experience that we could understand her Greek especially if she spoke to us at 80 miles an hour.
Once we'd got beyond good evening and established that all of us and absent Michaelis were well and
that the weather was still good we were lost. Whatever she was saying was completely lost on us.
Was she relaying the content of its discussion that had taken place with Katerina? Who knows?
We shrugged and apologized and tried to leave but she became more agitated and gestured at the land
beyond the walls under the trees and spoke more rapid, dense and sadly unintelligible to us
Greek reminding us again how much work was needed on our language classes. We finally said our
goodbyes and beat a retreat into town for a welcome evening drink. The next development was
when Katerina called to say that she'd spoken to Michaelis and as we'd first thought he was
happy to let us use the apotheke for free we thanked her and mentioned that we'd encountered
Delaney and not understood what she said. Well he may have a chance to clear this up as Michaelis
has suggested that you call round their house in town one afternoon or evening as he's worried.
What about? We asked a little angrily. Apparently he'd expressed concern to Katerina that our
belongings may suffer damage from damp or mice if left in store and he would like us to use the
empty house upstairs and give us a key for us to use as it's a safer and more secure store.
This presented us with something of a dilemma as we wanted to store some old shutters and original
wood from the building works as well as some outside chairs recently rescued from the municipal
tip. Being concerned that we would be reintroducing rot or woodworm back into our house and damage the
new timber in it but we certainly weren't planning to damage Michaelis's house. The subject would
need delicate discussion. Later that week we were due to leave the island to return to England.
We knew that we must meet Michaelis and Delaney before we left and before we placed our treasures
in the storeroom or infested his house with them. We couldn't delay any longer so we found ourselves
early one evening climbing up the hill to his house and walking through his well-stocked garden.
There was no need to knock as Michaelis was sitting on his veranda reading the paper.
Calamera, hello my friends. We joined him and admired the view of the bay,
glimpsed through some gaps in the neighbouring houses, entered each other and exchanged
embraces and Delaney disappeared into the house as we sat down and braced ourselves for our Greek
language workout. We'd come prepared having researched with a dictionary and a phrasebook
a prepared statement. It was along the lines of we thank you for your kind offer of the use of your
house for our possessions but they will only be old things and items such as paint ladders and
outside furniture that we have no room for in our small house. Are you sure you don't want to be
paid any rent? We skirted around the fact that we were worried about introducing Greek woodworm
into either of our houses and felt that this had not been an issue in the storeroom as we'd already
noticed an abundance of existing woodworm and my strop is there. Michaelis laughed and as far as
we could tell after putting on his reading glasses and examining the note carefully he seemed to
confirm it was okay to use the apotheke as we were his new friends. Now we will eat.
Alaney reappeared and introduced a range of delicious medettas, salads, tomatoes, garlic paste
on rusks, calamari, hard cheeses and boiled eggs. This was accompanied by raki for Michaelis and me
and more gentle wine for the ladies. We sat eating smiling at one another and admiring the
garden and the evening view of the bay and the mountains. Suddenly Alaney became very vocal and
said something that made Michaelis laugh. We didn't understand any of it apart from what sounded like
the word for eggs. Slowly Michaelis asked us whether we liked eggs. As we'd already eaten some that
evening with him we confirmed that we did and said that these were very good. He explained they were
eggs from their garden in the hills and he and Alaney laughed again. After several wrong turns
we eventually understood that the earlier encounter with Alaney was when she was up at the small
holding feeding the chickens and we had unbeknown to us refused her offer of some eggs. We could
only apologise both for our rude rebuttal to her kindness and for our poor Greek. Michaelis explained
it was of no consequence and all was okay now. So now we were not only homeowners but also enjoyed
storage rights in a Greek shed. Life was good.